To get a sense of how completely revolutionary have been the changes of the last two hundred years or so, it helps to have a long view of demography. When in 47 BC Julius Caesar was appointed perpetual dictator of the Roman Republic his domain stretched from what is now called Spain to modern Greece, as far north as Normandy in France, and much of the rest of the Mediterranean, a region that today contains over thirty countries. The population of these vast lands comprised around 50 million people, which was about 20% of a world population of approximately 250 million. More than eighteen centuries later, when Queen Victoria ascended the British throne in 1837, the number of people living on earth had grown to something like 1,000 million, a fourfold increase. Yet less than two hundred years after Victoria's coronation, world population has increased a further seven times — nearly twice the growth in a tenth of the time. {{1}}This latter multiplication is astonishingly rapid, and has had a transformative global impact.

Between 1840 and 1857 Queen Victoria gave birth to nine children, all of whom survived into adulthood. Britain's previous female monarch, Queen Anne, had died in 1714, aged forty-nine. She had eighteen pregnancies but her tragedy was that not a single child survived her. By 1930, just twenty-nine years after the death of Queen Victoria, another great British *matriarch, the Queen Mother, had produced only two children, Elizabeth II and Margaret. These facts about three queens — Anne, Victoria and Elizabeth the Queen Mother — neatly represent {{2}}the two trends that began in Britain between the eighteenth and twentieth centuries and which have subsequently spread across the world.

The first was a *precipitous drop in infant mortality, with the death of a child becoming mercifully irregular rather than a common agony for parents. The second, which followed, was a dramatic reduction in the average number of children born per woman. In Queen Anne's time, losing child after child was common. In mid-Victorian Britain, having a large brood was still the norm. Its complete survival into adulthood was unusual (in this, Victoria had luck as well as wealth in her favour) but would shortly become usual. By the interwar years of the twentieth century, the Queen Mother's expectation that both her daughters would survive into adulthood was quite normal, in Britain at least.

When Queen Victoria was born in 1819, only a small number of Europeans — around 30,000 — were living in Australia. The number of indigenous Australians at that time is uncertain, but estimates range from 300,000 to 1 million. When Victoria died at the start of the twentieth century, there were fewer than 100,000, while Australians of European origin numbered nearly 4 million, more than a hundred times as many as eighty years earlier. {{3}}This transformation in the size and composition of a continental population occurred in the space of a single lifetime. It changed Australia completely and forever, and would have a significant impact beyond Australia's shores, as the country came to play a major role in *provisioning and *manning British efforts in both world wars. A similar story can be told of Canada and New Zealand.

{{4}}These startling facts — the rapid but selective acceleration of population growth; plummeting infant mortality rates; falls in fertility; the nineteenth-century outpouring of European populations to lands beyond Europe — are all connected. They are born of the same profound social changes that accompanied the industrial revolution and have proved to be a formidable influence on the course of history, empowering some countries and communities at the expense of others, determining the fate of economies and empires, and laying the foundations of today's world.
